Add format-selection decision framework page and case studies (#205)
cloudnativegeo/cloud-optimized-geospatial-formats-guide: decision-framework/index.qmd

:::

## Preconditions

This guide already defines what makes a format cloud-optimized. The Welcome page states it as a four-part [cloud-optimized format pattern](../index.qmd#the-opportunity), and the glossary defines [cloud-optimized](../glossary.qmd#cloud-optimized) as the ability to read a meaningful *part* of a file without downloading *all* of it.

The framework does not restate that definition. It assumes it. Two consequences are worth naming here, because they decide whether a candidate belongs in the framework at all. They are entry conditions, not questions in the flowchart.

**P1. The format must support partial and parallel reads over HTTP.** [Random access](../glossary.qmd#random-access) through [HTTP range requests](../glossary.qmd#http-range-request) is what makes a format usable from [object storage](../glossary.qmd#object-storage-cloud-storage). It depends on the rest of the pattern: [metadata](../glossary.qmd#metadata) in a consistent place that a reader can load in a single read, and then addressable [chunks](../glossary.qmd#chunk), internal tiling, or both. A reader that cannot locate the bytes it needs from the metadata alone cannot fetch only those bytes.

> **P2. No opaque bundles.** An [archive format](../glossary.qmd#archive-format) is not disqualified just for being an archive. [PMTiles](../pmtiles/intro.qmd) is an archive and it is cloud-optimized, because its internal directory makes each tile addressable. What disqualifies a candidate is an archive with no addressable internal layout, or a layer of [external compression](../glossary.qmd#external-compression) wrapped around data that was already cloud-optimized. A zipped Zarr store, a monolithic LAZ file, and a single Parquet file with no row groups all fail this way: the client must fetch the whole object before it can use any part of it.

Reviewer: "monolithic LAZ file" is inprecise

```suggestion
**P2. No opaque bundles.** An [archive format](../glossary.qmd#archive-format) is not disqualified just for being an archive. [PMTiles](../pmtiles/intro.qmd) is an archive and it is cloud-optimized, because its internal directory makes each tile addressable. What disqualifies a candidate is an archive with no addressable internal layout, or a layer of [external compression](../glossary.qmd#external-compression) wrapped around data that was already cloud-optimized. A zipped Zarr store, a LAZ file without [COPC metadata](https://copc.io/), and a single Parquet file with no row groups all fail this way: the client must fetch the whole object before it can use any part of it.
```

> P2 is easy to fail by accident, and it is worth checking separately from object size. A bucket can hold large, well-sized objects and still fail P2, because the format inside each object is opaque. Object size and internal structure are two independent axes, and a candidate must satisfy both.

Reviewer: I don't find this guidance particularly helpful. "object size" isn't a criteria of either point.

```suggestion
```

## The spine

Two questions come first. They apply to all geospatial data.

> 1. **Control.** Do you have existing data, and can you reprocess it? This decides whether you can choose freely, whether you must virtualize, or whether you have reached a dead end.

Reviewer: I'll suggest some alternate wording, and remove some of the "conclusions" — these bullets are just about the questions:

```suggestion
1. **Control.** Do the data already exist? If they exist, are you able (technically, legally) to reprocess them?
```

> 2. **Topology.** What shape is the data? This selects the **format family**. It opens a candidate set. It does not pick one format.

Reviewer: We should add a section defining "format family", since that's not really a term-of-art.

```suggestion
2. **Topology.** What shape are the data? This selects the **format family**.
```

Author: Good catch, and it pushed us to a bigger problem than the sentence. It opens a candidate set. It does not pick one format. it marks the point where the framework changes stage.

So rather than trim it, I've made the two stages explicit. Stage 1 (control) asks whether you have a choice at all, and can legitimately end in "not yet possible". Stage 2 (topology and refinement) is reached only when you do have a choice, and is about ranking candidates that all work. The topology question is the hinge, and there's now a short table contrasting what you are asking before it against after it.

The format family table is in the `# The topology gate` section.

> Three refinements then rank the candidates: **intent**, the **object-size and grouping lever**, and **ecosystem maturity**. A fourth axis, **interpretation encoding**, is worth a separate look, because the formats differ a lot on it.

Reviewer: If we're going to use these terms to define our decision framework, we should define them up-front in a "Glossary" section or something similar.

Author: Added a glossary at the beginning of the page. Not sure if it should actually go at the end.

```{mermaid}
flowchart TD
    A[Data to publish or migrate] --> B{Existing data?}

>     B -- No --> C{Archival-format mandate?}

Reviewer: This is the first appearance of "archival-format mandate?" as a term — we should define it before it appears.

Author: added to the glossary. Any other better suited wording?

>     C -- Yes --> C1[Cloud-optimized HDF5 guidance + pick a CN access format]

Reviewer: This implies that HDF5 is the only "archival format"? Feels — strange to me...at least, that doesn't map to my experience.

```suggestion
    C -- Yes --> C1[Cloud-optimized HDF5 guidance + pick a Cloud Native access format]
```

Author: fixed, and the implication was unintentional. The node now reads `Optimize the mandated format + publish a cloud-optimized copy`, and the prose names netCDF and GRIB alongside HDF5, then says explicitly that HDF5/netCDF is where this guide happens to have a page, not what "archival format" means.

>     C -- No --> T[Topology gate]

Reviewer: I find the "gate" terminology a bit confusing — I think it could be clearer to ask the question:

```suggestion
    C -- No --> T["What shape are the data?"]
```

    B -- Yes --> D{Can you reprocess?}
    D -- Yes --> T

>     D -- No --> E{Optimizable / virtualizable?}

Reviewer: How does a user decide if something is optimizable or virtualizable? I did a quick scan through this document and didn't find an obvious answer.

Author: Good catch, and it's not just a missing definition: the node was `Optimizable / virtualizable?` but only virtualization had an outcome, so "optimizable" is missing in the flow.

The node is now just `Virtualizable?`, and there's a new **How to tell which branch you are on** subsection under the control section giving concrete tests instead of judgement calls. The virtualize test comes straight from this guide's [own Virtual Zarr warning](https://github.com/cloudnativegeo/cloud-optimized-geospatial-formats-guide/blob/main/zarr/virtual-zarr.qmd) 

Writing that surfaced a third level of control the diagram doesn't show: **repackaging**. Plenty of publishers cannot re-run the production chain but may rewrite the delivered files (plain TIFF → COG, LAZ → COPC, shapefile → GeoParquet). That's a byte-level rewrite rather than a science reprocessing, so it's often permitted where reprocessing isn't: format becomes a free choice while content stays fixed at whatever was delivered. It sits between "reprocess" and "virtualize", and it's arguably the most common real case.

It's in the prose now but not in the flowchart. Should we include a branch there?

Reviewer: > It's in the prose now but not in the flowchart. Should we include a branch there?

I think we should be as complete on the diagram as reasonable, since it's likely folks will screenshot (or otherwise clip out) the diagram (e.g. for presentations).

    E -- Yes --> E1[VirtualiZarr / Kerchunk / Icechunk: limited, better than nothing]

>     E -- No --> E2[Dead end: not yet funded, unlock this]

Reviewer: "not yet funded" feels strange to me

```suggestion
    E -- No --> E2[Dead end: no Cloud-Native formats work for your use-case]
```

Author: accepted

- It does not prescribe a catalog or a metadata standard. See [Metadata and cataloging](#metadata-and-cataloging).
- It does not replace a benchmark. When two candidates are close, measure them.
:::

## Key terms

The framework uses a few terms in a specific way. Each links to the section that develops it.

| Term | What it means here |
| --- | --- |
| [**Archival-format mandate**](#control) | A requirement to keep a specific archival format for preservation, such as HDF5, netCDF or GRIB, whatever cloud-optimized format you publish alongside it. |
| [**Control**](#control) | Whether the choice is yours to make at all: do the data already exist, and may you reprocess them, technically and legally. This is stage 1 of the spine, and it can end in "not yet possible". |
| [**Ecosystem maturity**](#maturity) | How settled a format is, on an L1 to L5 scale from experimental to de-facto standard. It answers "safe default, or bet?". |
| [**Grouping lever**](#grouping-lever) | The knob each format gives you for grouping bytes into objects: COG internal tiling, Zarr v3 sharding, COPC octree nodes, GeoParquet row groups. |

> | [**Intent**](#intent) | What the data are for: archive and download, processing, visualization, distribution, or data fusion. Most products serve several at once, in proportion. |

Reviewer 2: This is an interesting related phrase "access pattern", while many of the formats actually let you customize the internal layout to accommodate particular access patterns, thinking chunking dimension order, there may be cases where particular access patterns favor a format. Usually however it is more significant in terms of if you can reprocess, or how to approach virtualization.

Author: Interesting point indeed. following it up, "access pattern" turned out to expose a gap rather than just a missing word. The lever section as written only covers object size, which is a storage-backend question. Chunk shape and dimension order is a separate axis that the backend has no opinion on, and it's the one your access pattern actually drives.

I am adding an access pattern term to Key terms; a short "size and shape are two different questions" passage in the lever section, cross-linking the guide's existing [chunk shape vs chunk size](https://guide.cloudnativegeo.org/cloud-optimized-netcdf4-hdf5/#chunk-shape-vs-chunk-size) treatment rather than restating it; and your closing point made explicit.

the shape of the data were the answer:

| Before the topology question | After it |
| --- | --- |
| Do I have a cloud-optimized target at all? | Which of these targets suits me best? |
| The outcome can be "not yet possible" | Every remaining candidate works; you are ranking |
| Decided by ownership and reprocessing rights | Decided by intent, layout, maturity, encoding |

Four refinements then rank the candidates: **intent**, the **object-size and
grouping lever**, **ecosystem maturity**, and **interpretation encoding**. The
last one deserves a close look, because the formats differ on it more than
people expect.

```{mermaid}
flowchart TD
    A([Data to publish or migrate]) --> B{Existing data?}

    B -- No --> C{Archival-format<br/>mandate?}
    C -- Yes --> C1[Optimize the mandated format<br/>+ publish a cloud-optimized copy]
    C -- No --> T{{What shape are the data?}}

    B -- Yes --> D{Can you<br/>reprocess?}
    D -- Yes --> T
    D -- No --> E{Virtualizable?}
    E -- Yes --> E1[VirtualiZarr / Kerchunk / Icechunk<br/>limited, better than nothing]
    E -- No --> E2[Not yet implemented<br/>unlock this]

    T --> T1(2D raster<br/>COG)

>     T --> T2(N-D cube<br/>Zarr v3 / GeoZarr)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    T --> T2(N-D cubes<br/>Zarr v3 / GeoZarr)
```

Minor annoyance to me, but I consider COG a 3D datacube (singular), because 'bands' provides a 3rd dimension. Not always practical 3rd axis naming, or trickiness with differing resolutions and data types, but very feasible for some data.

and N-D cubes (plural) means more than 1 cube, e.g. 4+ dimensions. You can of course store 1D data in a N-D format.

    T --> T3(Point cloud<br/>COPC)

>     T --> T4(Vector / tabular<br/>GeoParquet)

Reviewer 2: Why are not all the formats represented in the Diagram? PMTiles and FlatGeoBuf should be listed somewhere. The Intent afterwards is the decider.

Author: Agreed, and this is [the same gap](https://github.com/cloudnativegeo/cloud-optimized-geospatial-formats-guide/pull/205#discussion_r3720248469) @gadomski hit from another direction. he asked for the diagram to be self-contained because people screenshot it.
Fixing the nodes to list all formats in the families.

    classDef refine  fill:#ece6f7,stroke:#7355a6,stroke-width:2px,color:#291d44

    class A entry
    class B,C,D,E ask
    class T hinge
    class T1,T2,T3,T4 family
    class C1,E1,E2 partial
    class R refine

```

### The control fork {#control}

**No existing data.** You are designing a new product, so you can choose freely. Go to the [topology question](#topology).

**If an archival-format mandate applies,** it adds a second job, it does not remove that freedom. If policy requires you to preserve a particular format like HDF5, netCDF, GRIB, or something specific to your domain, you still publish a cloud-optimized copy for readers, and you additionally make the mandated format as cloud-friendly as it can be. Where the mandated format is HDF5 or netCDF, this guide has [specific guidance](../cloud-optimized-netcdf4-hdf5/index.qmd) on consolidated metadata and chunk sizing. For other archival formats the principle holds even where the guide has no page: optimize what you must keep, and publish what people will actually read.

**Existing data you can reprocess.** You control the production chain, so you can also choose freely. Go to the [topology question](#topology).

> **Existing data you cannot reprocess.** You can often still publish a virtual view over the bytes you have. [Virtual Zarr](../zarr/virtual-zarr.qmd), with VirtualiZarr, Kerchunk, or Icechunk, builds an index that points into the original files. This gives range-based access without rewriting the data. The result is more limited than a native store, but it is much better than nothing.

Reviewer 2: Where do VRT, VPC, and GTI fit into this, they are virtual formats, sometimes in conjunction with the originals. I suppose they could be considered an external catalog/metadata.

Author: none of the three appear anywhere in the guide today. This page works by linking out to format pages, so naming them here would create dead ends. I'd rather not have the decision framework be where they get introduced.

> **Neither.** Some sources cannot be repackaged or virtualized today. Examples are HDF4, encrypted files, and a single large uncompressed blob. See [Dead ends are "unlock this"](#dead-ends-are-unlock-this).

Reviewer 2: `Dead ends are "unlock this"]` is a little awkward in phrasing. I'm working on something more intuitive to readers.

Reviewer 2: maybe "unlockable" or "future work" to sound more optimistic

Reviewer 2: or "not impossible"

Reviewer 3: second this!

Author: Agreed, and checking it turned up the page already says "not yet possible" in two other places so going this way.

#### How to tell which branch you are on

"Can you reprocess?" and "can you virtualize?" have concrete tests, not judgement calls.

**You can reprocess** if you have the processor, the inputs, and the budget to re-run

> the production chain. Then format and layout are both free choices: go to

Reviewer 2: Do we need to address user expectations? Existing tooling ecosystem? i.e. a processor may be hesitant to change formats for fear of disrupting their long standing community and all their existing tools. This maybe be considered an archival mandate, but it not exactly the same thing.

Author: Indeed, a mandate comes from institutional policy, is rarely negotiable, and you satisfy it indefinitely. User and tooling expectations come from your consumer community, are negotiable with notice.
Should we add a new subsection in cross-cutting consideration ssince it soes not change the topology it opens? Something like "Existing users and their tools".
Let me know.

Author: Added the paragraph, please review it

[Virtual Zarr](../zarr/virtual-zarr.qmd) publishes that index without copying the data.
Three tests, in order:

1. **Is the data chunked internally?** This is the hard requirement. A virtual store
   cannot change the source's chunk structure, so a single contiguous block virtualizes
   into one enormous chunk and buys you no useful partial access.
2. **Are those chunks a workable size?** You inherit them exactly. Chunks that are far
   too small or far too large stay that way.
3. **Is there a parser for the format?** Kerchunk and VirtualiZarr cover the common
   archival formats, including netCDF4, HDF5, GRIB2, TIFF and FITS.

**Otherwise you are at a dead end for now.** The usual blockers are HDF4, encrypted
files, a codec no parser can pass through, and a single uncompressed blob with no
internal chunking. See [Dead ends are "unlock this"](#dead-ends-are-unlock-this).

### Topology: what shape are the data? {#topology}

The shape of the data opens a candidate set:

| Topology | Primary candidate | Common alternatives |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 2D raster, per scene or per tile | [COG](../cloud-optimized-geotiffs/intro.qmd) | Zarr, if the product is really a cube |

> | N-D cube, for example `time × y × x × band` | [Zarr v3 / GeoZarr](../zarr/intro.qmd) | COG per time step, if slices are read alone |

Reviewer 2: COHDF5 needs to be included in the list, primarily for archive and tooling compatibility.

| Point cloud | [COPC](../copc/index.qmd) | [GeoParquet](../geoparquet/index.qmd), if columnar analytics dominate |
| Vector or tabular | [GeoParquet](../geoparquet/index.qmd) | [FlatGeobuf](../flatgeobuf/intro.qmd) for streaming, [PMTiles](../pmtiles/intro.qmd) for tiled delivery |

The question is about topology, not about the format the data arrives in. A netCDF granule that holds a point cloud belongs on the point-cloud branch. See the [format table](../index.qmd#data-type-to-traditional-to-cloud-optimized-geospatial-file-format-table) for how traditional formats map to cloud-optimized ones.

## Refinements {#refinements}

Apply these within the candidate set your topology opened.

### Intent {#intent}

What are the data for? Archive and download, processing, visualization, distribution, or data fusion. Three points matter:

- **Visualization is a first-class intent**, not a side effect. It has its own layout needs, mainly [overviews](../glossary.qmd#overviews) or a level of detail.

> - **On-the-fly and batched processing pull the layout in opposite directions.** On-the-fly access rewards small chunks, fine overviews, and cache locality. Batched processing rewards large shards or row groups and a layout that reads well in sequence.

Reviewer 2: 'in sequence' do you mean in parallel? I'm not sure I understand the meaning of sequence here.

Author: right, I meant contiguity. clarifying

At a scale of tens of thousands to millions of files, collection-level discovery becomes critical. [STAC](https://stacspec.org/) has an essential role there, and it is part of the cloud-native geospatial ecosystem that we recommend. It is **not a format and not a decision point in this framework**, so this page does not prescribe it. Choose a catalog approach that fits your organization.

### Within-format depth

Some choices sit below the format and are foundational:

- Base codecs, such as [ZSTD](../glossary.qmd#zstd) and [Deflate](../glossary.qmd#deflate)
- Data types and scale-offset encoding
- Sharding in Zarr v3

These are mature and in scope. The per-format pages cover them. More experimental optimizations, such as bit-rounding and advanced compression tricks, are out of scope here, or should be marked as immature when you use them.

### Dead ends are "unlock this"

When a source cannot be repackaged or virtualized today, the honest answer is *"not yet implemented"*, not *"impossible"*. The blocker is usually a missing parser, an unsupported codec, or source files with no internal chunking at all. Every one of those can change.

> Frame the branch that way, and route the reader back to the options: reprocess if you can get the chain changed, virtualize if a reader exists, or convert on ingest. Say what is missing, so somebody can unlock it.

Reviewer 2: There's a great story here about COHDF5, HDF5 itself classically was not amenable to cloud access, but work has been done to repack the bytes, and update the tooling to allow cloud patterns.

Author: Good story. I put it in, but kept to one line because this branch is only reached after failing reprocess, repackage and virtualize, so the reader has no write access to the bytes. The HDF5 unlock as we document it is largely a write-strategy change (paged aggregation), which needs exactly the ability that reader lacks

---
title: "Format Selection Decision Framework"
subtitle: "How to go from data you must publish to a short list of cloud-optimized format candidates"
---

## What this framework is

This framework helps you go from *"I have geospatial data to publish or migrate"* to a **short list of cloud-optimized format candidates**, and to the **layout choices** that make each candidate work.

It is a guide, not an oracle:

> - The **shape of your data** narrows the field.

Reviewer 3: should there be an initial bullet here that matches the first branches of the diagram: there may be a requirement to store data in archival file format (or it already exists in those formats)

Author: Agreed.

- The **intended use** and a few practical levers rank the remaining options.

> - **You keep the final call.**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **You make the final call.**
```

The framework is provider-neutral. Where a concrete number helps, such as an object-size policy or a benchmark result, the number is given as a worked example and flagged as an example, not as a rule.

This is a first, deliberately simple version. It aligns on the questions to ask and the order to ask them in. Follow the links to a format page when you need more detail.

::: {.callout-note}
## What this framework is not

- It is not a compliance checklist. No format is disqualified by a single answer.
- It does not prescribe a catalog or a metadata standard. See [Metadata and cataloging](#metadata-and-cataloging).
- It does not replace a benchmark. When two candidates are close, measure them.
:::

## Key terms

The framework uses a few terms in a specific way. Each links to the section that develops it.

| Term | What it means here |
| --- | --- |

> | [**Access pattern**](#grouping-lever) | How readers will actually hit the data: a time series at one point, a spatial window at one date, a full scan. Intent implies an access pattern, and your layout either serves it or fights it. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [**Access pattern**](#grouping-lever) | What data shapes will be requested: a time series at one point, a spatial window at one date, a full scan. Intent implies an access pattern, and your layout either serves it or fights it. |
```

Author: ok for replacing "hit" that was vague but I'd avoid "shapes" here, because shape is already carrying topology on this page ("what shape are the data?", "the shape of the data selects a format family"), so "data shapes" for access pattern would collide with the term we just spent the review pinning down. Going with "What subsets readers will request", which I think gets your precision without the overload.

> | [**Archival-format mandate**](#control) | A requirement to keep a specific archival format for preservation, such as HDF5, netCDF or GRIB, whatever cloud-optimized format you publish alongside it. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [**Archival-format mandate**](#control) | A requirement to maintain a specific archival format for preservation, such as HDF5, netCDF or GRIB, whatever cloud-optimized format you publish alongside it. |
```

> | [**Control**](#control) | Whether the choice is yours to make at all: do the data already exist, and may you reprocess them, technically and legally. This is stage 1 of the spine, and it can end in "not yet possible". |

Reviewer 3: I don't love the term spine, could we just use the term framework or tree in place?

Author: Agreed. This is a too literal translation from French 😅 that we often use. Applying "framework" .

> | [**Ecosystem maturity**](#maturity) | How settled a format is, on an L1 to L5 scale from experimental to de-facto standard. It answers "safe default, or bet?". |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [**Ecosystem maturity**](#maturity) | How settled a format is from experimental to de-facto standard. It answers "safe default, or bet?". |
```

L1 to L5 implies a formal scale which I don't think we are proposing or referencing here, but I may be mistaken

Author: Your are right but this is also the part of our opinionated expertise we want to state I believe. Happy to discuss where we should state these. Leaving it open for conversations

| [**Grouping lever**](#grouping-lever) | The knob each format gives you for grouping bytes into objects: COG internal tiling, Zarr v3 sharding, COPC octree nodes, GeoParquet row groups. |
| [**Intent**](#intent) | What the data are for: archive and download, processing, visualization, distribution, or data fusion. Most products serve several at once, in proportion. |
| [**Interpretation encoding**](#interpretation-encoding) | Whether the format carries units, CRS, nodata and any scale and offset transform in-format, so every reader recovers the same physical value, or leans on a side catalog. |

> | [**Object size**](#grouping-lever) | The size of the objects your layout actually writes to storage. Object stores reward a larger average object, and many backends apply a size policy or storage tier. |

Reviewer 3: I'm unsure of what is meant by the term "backends" in this context -- is it referring to object store services like S3 or Azure BlobStorage?

Author: Yes S3, Azure Blob, GCS, or an on-premises equivalent. "Backend" is vague, especially since the guide already has the term: [Object storage (Cloud storage)](https://guide.cloudnativegeo.org/glossary.html#object-storage-cloud-storage) in the glossary.
Swapped all accurences to object store, and added the concrete examples in parentheses at first use so a reader doesn't have to follow the link to find out what's meant.

**P2. No opaque bundles.** An [archive format](../glossary.qmd#archive-format) is not disqualified just for being an archive. [PMTiles](../pmtiles/intro.qmd) is an archive and it is cloud-optimized, because its internal directory makes each tile addressable. What disqualifies a candidate is an archive with no addressable internal layout, or a layer of [external compression](../glossary.qmd#external-compression) wrapped around data that was already cloud-optimized. A zipped Zarr store, a LAZ file without [COPC metadata](https://copc.io/), and a single Parquet file with no row groups all fail this way: the client must fetch the whole object before it can use any part of it.

> ## The spine

Reviewer 3: As noted above, can we use a different term than spine? Why not use "framework" or "decision tree"?

    classDef refine  fill:#ece6f7,stroke:#7355a6,stroke-width:2px,color:#291d44

    class A entry
    class B,C,D,E ask
    class T hinge
    class T1,T2,T3,T4 family
    class C1,E1,E2 partial
    class R refine

```

### The control fork {#control}

**No existing data.** You are designing a new product, so you can choose freely. Go to the [topology question](#topology).

**If an archival-format mandate applies,** it adds a second job, it does not remove that freedom. If policy requires you to preserve a particular format like HDF5, netCDF, GRIB, or something specific to your domain, you still publish a cloud-optimized copy for readers, and you additionally make the mandated format as cloud-friendly as it can be. Where the mandated format is HDF5 or netCDF, this guide has [specific guidance](../cloud-optimized-netcdf4-hdf5/index.qmd) on consolidated metadata and chunk sizing. For other archival formats the principle holds even where the guide has no page: optimize what you must keep, and publish what people will actually read.

**Existing data you can reprocess.** You control the production chain, so you can also choose freely. Go to the [topology question](#topology).

> **Existing data you cannot reprocess.** You can often still publish a virtual view over the bytes you have. [Virtual Zarr](../zarr/virtual-zarr.qmd), with VirtualiZarr, Kerchunk, or Icechunk, builds an index that points into the original files. This gives range-based access without rewriting the data. The result is more limited than a native store, but it is much better than nothing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Existing data you cannot reprocess.** You can often still publish a virtual view over the bytes you have. The [Virtual Zarr](../zarr/virtual-zarr.qmd) approach is to use a library (such as VirtualiZarr or Kerchunk) to build an index that points into the original files. That index is then stored in formats such as kerchunk json, kerchunk parquet or Icechunk. This gives range-based access without rewriting the data. The result is more limited than a native store, but it is much better than nothing.
```

**Neither.** Some sources cannot be repackaged or virtualized today. Examples are HDF4, encrypted files, and a single large uncompressed blob. See [Dead ends are "unlock this"](#dead-ends-are-unlock-this).

#### How to tell which branch you are on

> "Can you reprocess?" and "can you virtualize?" have concrete tests, not judgement calls.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Whether you can reprocess or viftualize usually depends on the data and data project context. Answers to these questions are not judgement calls.
```

- **Visualization is a first-class intent**, not a side effect. It has its own layout needs, mainly [overviews](../glossary.qmd#overviews) or a level of detail.
- **On-the-fly and batched processing pull the layout in opposite directions.** On-the-fly access rewards small chunks, fine overviews, and cache locality. Batched processing rewards large shards or row groups and a layout that reads well in sequence.
- **Data fusion raises the stakes on encoding.** Combining products from different missions or processors means every input must be read back as the same physical value, and subsets from each must line up. Fusion is a form of processing, but it is worth naming separately: it weights [interpretation encoding](#interpretation-encoding) and consistent grids far higher than single-product analysis does, and it usually rewards a tabular or columnar target where joins are cheap.

Most real datasets serve several intents at once. Weigh them in proportion rather than picking one. The [case studies](case-studies.qmd) state an intent mix for each product, which is what decides the ranking inside a candidate set.

> ### The object-size and grouping lever {#grouping-lever}

Reviewer 3: Can we replace "grouping lever" with "organizational units"

Author: Let's dicsuss this.

Reviewer 2: I get the user of `lever` to imply it's changeable

Every candidate format has a knob that sets how bytes are grouped into objects:

| Format | Grouping lever |
| --- | --- |
| COG | internal tiling and overviews |
| Zarr v3 | chunks within shards ([sharding](../glossary.qmd#chunk-size)) |
| COPC | octree nodes |
| GeoParquet | row groups, plus partitioning |

Tune the lever to your **storage backend's object-size policy**. [Object stores](../glossary.qmd#object-storage-cloud-storage) degrade when they must index very many tiny objects, so most backends reward a larger average object.

> One worked example: the [CNES Datalake](https://cnes.fr/en/projects/centre-de-calcul) sorts data into tiers by mean object size, with about 32 MB or more for warm disk and about 100 MB or more for cold tape. Those numbers belong to that backend. Your backend will have its own policy, and it may have none. Read the tiers as an instance of a general concern.

Reviewer 3: >Read the tiers as an instance of a general concern.

I'm not sure what this means

Author: I was trying to say "this is an example, not a rule" but it is vague. Replaced with something actionable: don't carry those numbers over, but do find out whether your storage has an object-size policy and size the grouping against it.

The lever works in both directions, and which direction you need depends on product size:

- **Products that are already large.** Group *within* one product. Size the shard, the tile, or the row group so it clears the policy.
- **Products that are small.** Sharding within one granule only makes the fragmentation worse. Group *above* the product instead: mosaic or concatenate many granules into one range-addressable object.

**Size and shape are two different questions.** How *big* the objects are is a
storage-backend question, answered above. How the bytes are arranged *inside* them
(chunk shape, and the order of the dimensions) is an **access-pattern** question,
and the backend has no opinion on it. A `time × y × x` cube chunked long in time
serves a time series at one point cheaply and a full-scene map expensively; chunked
wide in `y` and `x` it does the opposite. This guide works it through, with a
diagram, in [chunk shape vs chunk size](../cloud-optimized-netcdf4-hdf5/index.qmd#chunk-shape-vs-chunk-size).

> Shape rarely decides *which* format you pick, because every member of a family

Reviewer 3: >because every member of a family exposes some version of the knob

I'm not sure what this means

Author: Fair, that was vague. Rewritten to name the mechanisms.

exposes some version of the knob. It decides how well the format you picked
performs. And it is mostly settled back at the [control](#control) question, because only reprocessing lets you choose the shape freely.

### Ecosystem maturity {#maturity}

> The real question is not a version number. It is whether you need something production-grade that you can count on, or you are willing to be an early adopter. Maturity is what separates a safe default from a bet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ecosystem maturity may influence the final decision. You may need something production-grade that you can count on, or you may have the flexibility to be an early adopter. Maturity is what separates a safe default from a bet.
```

| **L1** | Experimental: draft or in-flux spec, few implementations |

Where the candidates sit today:

| Format | Specification | Tooling | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| [COG](../cloud-optimized-geotiffs/intro.qmd) | De-facto standard, on a GeoTIFF base | GDAL, rio-tiler, TiTiler, every GIS | **L5** |
| [GeoParquet](../geoparquet/index.qmd) | v1.x, stable, on an Apache Parquet base | GDAL, GeoPandas, DuckDB, Arrow | **L4** |
| [COPC](../copc/index.qmd) | v1.0, stable, on a LAZ base | PDAL, untwine, QGIS, copc.js | **L4** |
| [FlatGeobuf](../flatgeobuf/intro.qmd) | Stable, on a flatbuffers base | GDAL and OGR, QGIS, flatgeobuf.js | **L3** |
| [GeoZarr](../zarr/intro.qmd) | Draft, in an OGC Standards Working Group | Emerging, mostly xarray-based stacks | **L2** |

**COG is the reference case** and the format the others are measured against: a de-facto standard for years, supported by every relevant library and GIS, with no open specification risk.

**For GeoParquet and COPC, the risk is integration effort, not the specification.** Each inherits a mature base format and adds a spatial index on top.

> #### Zarr v3 and GeoZarr are two different questions

Reviewer 3: Should Zarr v3 be in the table above?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### New Zarr Standards: Distinguishing Zarr v3 and GeoZarr
```

### Interpretation encoding {#interpretation-encoding}

Does the format carry the information a reader needs to recover the same physical value, or does it lean on a side catalog? The information is units, the [CRS](../glossary.qmd#coordinate-reference-system-crs), the nodata fill, and any scale and offset transform.

This axis separates the candidates more than people expect:

- **Zarr v3 makes the information first-class.** With the `scale_offset` codec, a declared fill value, Zarr conventions for projection, CRS and multiscale, the transform is a first-class array property. Every reader recovers the same value.
- **COG, GeoParquet, and COPC standardize the CRS** but leave the value transform to side metadata. Readers honor side metadata unevenly.

If your product stores scaled integers, or if an undeclared fill value would change a computed result, weigh this axis heavily.

## Cross-cutting considerations

These are not decision points. They apply whatever you choose.

### Metadata and cataloging

> Metadata that a reader can fetch in a single request is part of [P1](#preconditions), not an extra. Every candidate the [topology question](#topology) opens has its own mechanism for it: Zarr consolidated metadata, COG headers, GeoParquet footers, and the COPC header. What this section adds is the level *above* a single file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metadata that a reader can fetch in a single request is part of [Precondition P1](#preconditions), not an extra. Every candidate the [topology question](#topology) opens has its own mechanism for it: Zarr consolidated metadata, COG headers, GeoParquet footers, and the COPC header. What this section adds is the level *above* a single file.
```

I had no memory of what P1 meant.

::: {.callout-note}
## What this framework is not

- It is not a compliance checklist. No format is disqualified by a single answer.
- It does not prescribe a catalog or a metadata standard. See [Metadata and cataloging](#metadata-and-cataloging).
- It does not replace a benchmark. When two candidates are close, measure them.
:::

## Key terms

The framework uses a few terms in a specific way. Each links to the section that develops it.

| Term | What it means here |
| --- | --- |
| [**Access pattern**](../glossary.qmd#access-pattern) | What subsets readers will request: a time series at one point, a spatial window at one date, a full scan. Intent implies an access pattern, and your layout either serves it or fights it. Defined in the guide's glossary; the layout consequences are in [the grouping lever](#grouping-lever). |
| [**Archival-format mandate**](#control) | A requirement to maintain a specific archival format for preservation, such as HDF5, netCDF or GRIB, whatever cloud-optimized format you publish alongside it. |

> | [**Control**](#control) | Whether the choice is yours to make at all: do the data already exist, and may you reprocess them, technically and legally. This is stage 1 of the framework, and it can end in "not yet possible". |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [**Control**](#control) | Whether the choice is yours to make at all: do the data already exist, and may you reprocess them, technically and legally. This is Stage 1 of the framework, and it can end in "not yet possible". |
```

See later comment about proper nouns

| [**Ecosystem maturity**](#maturity) | How settled a format is, on an L1 to L5 scale from experimental to de-facto standard. It answers "safe default, or bet?". |
| [**Grouping lever**](#grouping-lever) | The knob each format gives you for grouping bytes into objects: COG internal tiling, Zarr v3 sharding, COPC octree nodes, GeoParquet row groups. |
| [**Intent**](#intent) | What the data are for: archive and download, processing, visualization, distribution, or data fusion. Most products serve several at once, in proportion. |

> | [**Interpretation encoding**](#interpretation-encoding) | Whether the format carries units, CRS, nodata and any scale and offset transform in-format, so every reader recovers the same physical value, or leans on a side catalog. |

Reviewer 2: just noting the line wrapping here in the html is not good. Wonder if we need to set a min width on the table?

https://quarto.org/docs/authoring/tables.html#column-widths

<img width="224" height="113" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/52bc0812-a11c-4923-847c-94656718af00" />

I'm adding a suggestion at the bottom of the table to do this.

| [**Object size**](#grouping-lever) | The size of the objects your layout actually writes to storage. Object stores reward a larger average object, and many apply a minimum size policy or sort objects into storage tiers. |
| [**Refinement**](#refinements) | A criterion applied *inside* a format family to rank its members. There are four: intent, the grouping lever, ecosystem maturity, and interpretation encoding. |
| [**Topology**](#topology) | The shape of the data: 2D raster, N-D cubes, point cloud, or vector and tabular. Answering *what shape are the data?* selects a format family, not a format. |

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: {tbl-colwidths="[15,85]"}
```

**P2. No opaque bundles.** An [archive format](../glossary.qmd#archive-format) is not disqualified just for being an archive. [PMTiles](../pmtiles/intro.qmd) is an archive and it is cloud-optimized, because its internal directory makes each tile addressable. What disqualifies a candidate is an archive with no addressable internal layout, or a layer of [external compression](../glossary.qmd#external-compression) wrapped around data that was already cloud-optimized. A zipped Zarr store, a LAZ file without [COPC metadata](https://copc.io/), and a single Parquet file with no row groups all fail this way: the client must fetch the whole object before it can use any part of it.

## The two stages

> The framework runs in **two stages**, and the topology question is the hinge between them.

Reviewer 2: I don't think I understand what is meant by **hinge** in this context.

**Stage 1 — control: do you have a choice?** Do the data already exist? If they
exist, are you able (technically, legally) to reprocess them? This stage can end
the process. If you cannot reprocess the data and cannot virtualize them, there
is no format decision to make yet.

**Stage 2 — topology and refinement: which format?** You reach this stage only

> when stage 1 leaves you free to choose. Here the shape of the data selects a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
when Stage 1 leaves you free to choose. Here the shape of the data selects a
```
Stage 1 in this case is a proper noun, maybe it should even be bold. I was just checking that we consistently use 1 vs one in text. So far the only time we use numerals is when numbering stages, which is good, but the references in paragraphs should match.

    E -- No --> E2[Not yet possible<br/>say what is missing]

    T --> T1(2D raster<br/>COG, Zarr, PMTiles)
    T --> T2(N-D cubes<br/>GeoZarr, COG, CO-HDF5)
    T --> T3(Point cloud<br/>COPC, GeoParquet)
    T --> T4(Vector / tabular<br/>GeoParquet, FlatGeobuf, PMTiles)

    T1 --> R([Refine: intent, object-size lever,<br/>maturity, interpretation])
    T2 --> R
    T3 --> R
    T4 --> R

    classDef entry   fill:#e7eefb,stroke:#3f6db3,stroke-width:2px,color:#152744
    classDef ask     fill:#fff6dc,stroke:#ad7c00,stroke-width:2px,color:#4a3600
    classDef hinge   fill:#dfeffa,stroke:#2a7fb8,stroke-width:3px,color:#0e3247
    classDef family  fill:#e4f4ea,stroke:#39875f,stroke-width:2px,color:#12301e
    classDef partial fill:#fdeadb,stroke:#c06520,stroke-width:2px,color:#48260a
    classDef refine  fill:#ece6f7,stroke:#7355a6,stroke-width:2px,color:#291d44

    class A entry
    class B,C,D,E,P ask
    class T hinge
    class T1,T2,T3,T4 family
    class C1,P1,E1,E2 partial
    class R refine

```

### The control fork {#control}

**No existing data.** You are designing a new product, so you can choose freely. Go to the [topology question](#topology).

> **If an archival-format mandate applies,** it adds a second job, it does not remove that freedom. If policy requires you to preserve a particular format like HDF5, netCDF, GRIB, or something specific to your domain, you still publish a cloud-optimized copy for readers, and you additionally make the mandated format as cloud-friendly as it can be. Where the mandated format is HDF5 or netCDF, this guide has [specific guidance](../cloud-optimized-netcdf4-hdf5/index.qmd) on consolidated metadata and chunk sizing. For other archival formats the principle holds even where the guide has no page: optimize what you must keep, and publish what people will actually read.

Reviewer 2: you can still publish .... it's optional
wrapping in virtualization ... is also an option but less recommended

**Existing data you can reprocess.** You control the production chain, so you can also choose freely. Go to the [topology question](#topology).

**Existing data you cannot reprocess, but can rewrite.** You may still be allowed to repackage the delivered files: a plain TIFF becomes a COG, a LAZ file becomes a COPC, a shapefile becomes GeoParquet. The format is a free choice, but the content is fixed at whatever was delivered. Go to the [topology question](#topology).

> **Existing data you cannot reprocess.** You can often still publish a virtual view over the bytes you have. The [Virtual Zarr](../zarr/virtual-zarr.qmd) approach is to use a library (such as VirtualiZarr or Kerchunk) to build an index that points into the original files. That index is then stored in formats such as kerchunk json, kerchunk parquet or Icechunk. This gives range-based access without rewriting the data. The result is more limited than a native store, but it is much better than nothing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Existing data you cannot reprocess.** You can often still publish a virtual view over the bytes you have. The [Virtual Zarr](../zarr/virtual-zarr.qmd) approach is to use a library (such as VirtualiZarr or Kerchunk) to build an index that points into the original files. That index is then stored in formats such as Icechunk, kerchunk json, or kerchunk parquet. This gives range-based access without rewriting the data. The result is more limited than a native store, but it is much better than nothing.
```

Put the formats in the same order that the virtual libraries are mentioned, and also our preference.

> **Neither.** Some sources cannot be repackaged or virtualized today. Examples are HDF4, encrypted files, and a single large uncompressed blob. See [Not yet possible](#not-yet-possible).

Reviewer 2: Wait does it matter if the blob is uncompressed? I don't think a compressed blob would be any better.

@abarciauskas-bgse how would you phrase this to be inclusive of things like bzip2 that we were recently asked about?

#### How to tell which branch you are on

> Whether you can reprocess or viftualize usually depends on the data and data project context. Answers to these questions are not judgement calls.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whether you can reprocess or virtualize usually depends on the data and data project context. Answers to these questions are not judgement calls.
```
typo

**You can reprocess** if you have the processor, the inputs, and the budget to re-run
the production chain. Then format and layout are both free choices: go to
[topology](#topology).

**You can repackage** if you cannot re-run the chain but you may rewrite the delivered

> files. A plain TIFF becomes a COG, a LAS or LAZ file becomes a COPC, a shapefile or CSV

Reviewer 2: I know we don't want to be exhaustive but should we include at least once example that changes format drastically. e.g. HDF5 to COGs or many COGs to one Zarr?

becomes GeoParquet. Repackaging is a byte-level rewrite rather than a science
reprocessing, so it is often permitted where reprocessing is not. Format is a free
choice; the content is fixed at whatever was delivered.

**You can virtualize** if the bytes you have can be indexed as they are.
[Virtual Zarr](../zarr/virtual-zarr.qmd) publishes that index without copying the data.
Three tests, in order:

1. **Is the data chunked internally?** This is the hard requirement. A virtual store
   cannot change the source's chunk structure, so a single contiguous block virtualizes
   into one enormous chunk and buys you no useful partial access.

> 2. **Are those chunks a workable size?** You inherit both the size and the shape exactly, so the source's chunking decides which access patterns stay cheap. A store chunked for one access pattern cannot be virtualized into a store that is good for a different one.

Reviewer 2: Maybe I've misunderstood, @abarciauskas-bgse I thought there was some choice when it comes to dimension optimization in the virtual store. Yes the read efficiency will always be blocked by the native chunking, but does the metadata layout impact performance?

> 3. **Is there a parser for the format?** Kerchunk and VirtualiZarr cover the common

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. **Is there a parser for the format?** VirtualiZarr and Kerchunk  cover the common
```
preferential ordering

   archival formats, including netCDF4, HDF5, GRIB2, TIFF and FITS.

**Otherwise there is no path yet.** The usual blockers are HDF4, encrypted
files, a codec no parser can pass through, and a single uncompressed blob with no
internal chunking. See [Not yet possible](#not-yet-possible).

> **Passing these tests means you *can*, not that you *should* yet.** A producer may be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Passing these tests means you *can*, not that you *should*.** A producer may be
```

If your product stores scaled integers, or if an undeclared fill value would change a computed result, weigh this axis heavily.

## Cross-cutting considerations

These are not decision points. They apply whatever you choose.

### Metadata and cataloging

Metadata that a reader can fetch in a single request is part of [Precondition P1](#preconditions), not an extra. Every candidate the [topology question](#topology) opens has its own mechanism for it: Zarr consolidated metadata, COG headers, GeoParquet footers, and the COPC header. What this section adds is the level *above* a single file.

At a scale of tens of thousands to millions of files, collection-level discovery becomes critical. [STAC](https://stacspec.org/) has an essential role there, and it is part of the cloud-native geospatial ecosystem that we recommend. It is **not a format and not a decision point in this framework**, so this page does not prescribe it. Choose a catalog approach that fits your organization.

### Within-format depth

Some choices sit below the format and are foundational:

- Base codecs, such as [ZSTD](../glossary.qmd#zstd) and [Deflate](../glossary.qmd#deflate)

> - Data types and scale-offset encoding

Reviewer 2: Do we need to be clear that some Formats don't support some data types (COPC might be numeric only, no strings)? or mixing of data types (Tiff)

Where do we address multi-resolution, e.g. a 5m band and a 10m band in the same file?

Author: Added a specific section for multiscales and overviews

Every candidate format has a knob that sets how bytes are grouped into objects:

| Format | Grouping lever |
| --- | --- |
| COG | internal tiling and overviews |
| Zarr v3 | chunks within shards ([sharding](../glossary.qmd#chunk-size)) |
| COPC | octree nodes |
| GeoParquet | row groups, plus partitioning |

Tune the lever to your [object store's](../glossary.qmd#object-storage-cloud-storage) **object-size policy** (S3, Azure Blob Storage, Google Cloud Storage, or an on-premises equivalent). Object stores degrade when they must index very many tiny objects, so most reward a larger average object.

One worked example: the [CNES Datalake](https://cnes.fr/en/projects/centre-de-calcul) sorts data into [tiers](../glossary.qmd#tiered-storage) by mean object size, with about 32 MB or more for warm disk and about 100 MB or more for cold tape. This serves the general point: find out whether your storage has an object-size policy, and size the lever against it. Some providers publish a threshold, some only charge you as if your objects were larger, and some have no policy at all.

The lever works in both directions, and which direction you need depends on product size:

> - **Products that are already large.** Group *within* one product. Size the shard, the tile, or the row group so it clears the policy.

Reviewer 2: For Zarr I think most of this holds true. However for some of the other formats, there might be a 3rd item in this list, which is to actually split an existing file into separate files because there would be too many chunks/shards in one file the index would be huge. This might be a for later discussion.

Reviewer 2: I'm thinking about how we somewhat manually design geoparquet partitions (across files), Zarr already does this inherently. There is a a practical limit though, you wouldn't want a single COG for the whole world at 1m resolution, even if it is chunked nicely, that file would be hard to work with on a management side.
